---
title: "When Black Friday Deals Become a Commodity: How Retailers Can Win This Holiday Season"
author: "Natasha Janic"
date: "2017-11-21"
featuredImage: "./Black-Friday-Hatch.jpeg"
tags: "Enterprise Loyalty"
---

Many consumers have been receiving Black Friday promotions for weeks. Brands have likely been focused on executing their strategy for the holidays for quite some time and rightfully so. [Nearly 40% of all retail sales](https://www.thebalance.com/what-is-black-friday-3305710) occur between Black Friday and Christmas, with nearly 102 million people shopping last Black Friday alone. Imagine all of those people in one space and the number becomes mind-boggling. This year brings an additional opportunity for retailers as the amount spent per shopper is expected to increase by approximately 4% to $967.13.

While consumers will be searching for the best deals, having massive sales during Thanksgiving weekend has become a commodity. Shoppers can typically find great deals wherever they go, and even beyond Black Friday alone, so retailers must be focused on differentiating through other avenues, such as the shopping experience. The rise of e-commerce has greatly the attributed to the commoditization of Black Friday sales, but this doesn’t necessarily mean that in-store sales should suffer. We’ll discuss how in-store experiences can boost sales, the personalization play, and how loyalty programs can help retailers attract customers in a hyper-saturated landscape.

## In-Store Isn't Dead, It's Changing

The rise of e-commerce and giants such as Amazon have drastically changed the landscape and sent many retailers into a frenzy. Adobe predicts that e-commerce sales will reach [$104.7 billion](https://marketingland.com/holiday-e-commerce-revenue-will-surpass-100b-according-adobe-228434) this holiday season, up 14% from just last year. This, coupled with the many high-profile department store closings, would make it seem as if the in-store experience is dead. However, retail sales are up [$122 billion](http://www.ihlservices.com/product/debunking-the-retail-apocalypse/) year-over-year. Brick and mortar retailers have a big opportunity to make a splash this holiday season, despite competition from e-commerce.

Approximately [71% of consumers](https://blog.gpshopper.com/over-one-third-of-consumers-typically-feel-nothing-when-shopping-in-store) plan to do at least half of their Christmas shopping in-store, and this still holds true for tech-first generations with 67% of Gen Z preferring to purchase items in-store. However, with in-store discounts on Black Friday being a commodity, retailers do have to make an extra effort to differentiate the shopping experience.

Large department stores such as Macy’s, are known for beautiful in-store displays that can be enough to draw customers in on their own. However, many retailers are turning to technology to create tantalizing experiences that engage customers without overtly pushing their products. To balance online sales, brands such as Nike and Under Armour have created highly engaging in-store customer experiences with personalization studios and virtual reality experiences, respectively. Beauty retailer, Sephora, took advantage of digital natives’ preference for DIY videos on YouTube, and has in-store tablets that allow shoppers to take a selfie and virtually sample various products. Other retailers such as Nordstrom Rack, have enabled simple technology solutions that allow employees to check customers out anywhere in the store.

While many retailers have found creative and exciting ways to engage customers in-store, many others still haven’t figured out a way to make that experience special. Most retailers with brick and mortar locations also have an e-commerce site, but [61% of millennials](https://marketingland.com/customer-identity-brings-wow-factor-back-black-friday-228241) claim that their experiences are disconnected from channel to channel. Regardless of whether the in-store experience uses cutting edge technology, or whether it simply provides a faster checkout for customers, retailers should be consistent across channels.

## It's Definitely Personal

Hand-in-hand with consistency across channels is personalization. In the span of one generation, consumers have gone from mail-order catalogues to expecting retailers to anticipate what they’re looking for before even visiting the store. While personalization should be part of the marketing strategy year-round, it can easily be overlooked in the frenzy of holiday marketing. Retailers fall back into the catalogue days with Black Friday previews and advertisements that bombard consumers with the once-a-year deals they can’t afford to miss. Or can they?

Consumers tune out the irrelevant advertisements because [71% prefer ads tailored](https://www.marketingdive.com/news/study-71-of-consumers-prefer-personalized-ads/418831/) to their interests and shopping habits. Because most consumers are buying gifts for others (and maybe a couple of ‘treat yourself’ gifts for themselves), retailers should focus on building personalization off of shopping habits and up-selling. Eighty-five percent of consumers plan for holiday shopping, so mass advertisements may not be the most effective channel. Retailers can put customers at ease by offering access to wish lists to keep them organized, free shipping, and gift guides. [Nearly two-thirds of consumers](https://www.chainstoreage.com/news/loyalty-beyond-holidays-brand-purpose-crucial-long-term-customer-loyalty/) say their shopping experience would be easier if they got gift ideas for the holidays!

While consumers do plan their gifts for the most part, retailers can maximize on personalization by up-selling customers on product recommendations based on their purchase behavior. For example, if someone purchases a tablet, they should receive an email up-selling them on a case or another accessory. The same can be done with small purchases such as a scarf, followed by an offer on matching gloves. Above all, retailers should ensure they keep lines of communication open post-Black Friday. Send an email to your customers thanking them for shopping with you on the busy day, and offer them an incentive to return to your store in December and beyond.

## Loyalty Still Matters

With the prevalence of steep discounts beginning even before Black Friday, there’s a natural inclination to throw the rules of customer loyalty out the window. However, this is a great time to not only show loyal customers they’re valued, but to also boost brand loyalty with new or infrequent customers. Black Friday previews can drum up interest by the masses, but when it comes to actually impacting customer behavior in the long run, it falls short. Long-term loyalty begins with understanding customers beyond segments that encompass thousands of attributes, and getting down to an individualized understanding of a single customer.

Serve loyal customers with exclusive access to sales and personalized item suggestions based on past purchase behavior. This is the most valuable customer segment because Black Friday deals from competitors are less likely to sway these customers. In fact, 75% of consumers say they’re more likely to shop with a retailer during the holidays if they’re part of the loyalty program. Be sure you’re giving these customers extra special treatment during the holidays - maybe even an exclusive gift as a token of gratitude for their business all year-round!

Although holiday shopping is a short-lived period of time, it can have a tremendous impact on a business for the year ahead. With many new customers potentially entering the store, be sure to serve them with a great in-store and online experience so they keep coming back. Entice them to join your loyalty program to continue receiving great offers and personalized rewards all year round.

**In a Nutshell...**

Think of the holidays as a gateway into long-term customer loyalty and incorporate it into an overall marketing strategy. While steep discounts may be enough to draw some customers in, Black Friday and holiday deals have become a commodity. E-commerce has changed the game for brick & mortar retailers, but it hasn’t won the game. In addition to discounts, the most successful retailers will bridge gap between online & in-store with engaging displays and experiences, provide gift guides, and maximize on up-sell opportunities based on purchase behavior. Take advantage of increased foot traffic and keep customers coming back beyond the holidays with personalized offers and marketing.
